8.8 release notes (#3282)
elastic/security-docs: docs/release-notes/8.8.asciidoc

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.8.0]]
==== Breaking changes

//tag::breaking-changes[]
// NOTE: The breaking-changes tagged regions are reused in the Elastic Installation and Upgrade Guide. The pull attribute is defined within this snippet so it properly resolves in the output.
:pull: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/
* The privileges for attaching alerts to cases have changed. Now, you need at least `Read` privileges for Security and `All` privileges for Cases ({pull}147985[#147985]).
* Adds conditional actions to the rules API. In {elastic-sec} 8.7 and earlier, action frequencies were set on a rule level by defining the `throttle` field. In 8.8 and later, action frequencies are set at the action level, and the `throttle` field is replaced by the `frequency` and `alert_filters` fields. The following APIs are affected:
** <<rules-api-get,Get rule>>
** <<rules-api-find,Find rules>>
** <<rules-api-create,Create rule>>
** <<rules-api-update,Update rule>>
** <<bulk-actions-rules-api,Bulk rule actions>>

//end::breaking-changes[]

[discrete]
[[deprecations-8.8.0]]
==== Deprecations

> * The rule level `throttle` field, which defines how often rule actions are run, is deprecated. The field will remain active for at least the next 12 months. In {elastic-sec} 8.8 and later, we strongly recommend using the action level `frequency` field to set frequencies for individual rule actions.

Reviewer: @peluja1012 let me know if this works or if we need to make additional changes. Ty!

cc: @banderror @e40pud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The rule level `throttle` field is deprecated in {elastic-sec} 8.8 and is scheduled for end of life in Q4 of 2024. In {elastic-sec} 8.8 and later, we strongly recommend using the action level `frequency` field to set frequencies for individual rule actions.
```

[[release-notes-header-8.8.0]]
== 8.8

[[release-notes-8.8.0]]
=== 8.8.0

[discrete]
[[known-issue-8.8.0]]
==== Known issues

* Setting the `max_signals` value higher than the {kibana-ref}/alert-action-settings-kb.html#alert-settings[`xpack.alerting.rules.run.alerts.max`] value will lead to rule failure.

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.8.0]]
==== Breaking changes

//tag::breaking-changes[]
// NOTE: The breaking-changes tagged regions are reused in the Elastic Installation and Upgrade Guide. The pull attribute is defined within this snippet so it properly resolves in the output.
:pull: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/
There are no breaking changes in 8.8.0.
//end::breaking-changes[]

[discrete]
[[deprecations-8.8.0]]
==== Deprecations
There are no deprecations in 8.8.0.

[discrete]
[[features-8.8.0]]
==== New features

> * Adds a new response action that allows you to execute commands on a selected host (https://github.com/elastic/security-team/issues/5441[5441]).

Reviewer 2: > @joepeeples @kevinlog should this link to a specific PR, or a set of PRs, instead of the dev epic?

Yes, also the `security-team` repo is private, so that link would produce a 404 for anyone outside of Elastic. There are tons of issues & PRs for this feature, but this one seems good for RNs:

```suggestion
* Adds a new response action that allows you to execute commands on a selected host ({pull}150202[#150202]).
```

* Adds a new response action that allows you to execute commands on a selected host ({pull}150202[#150202]).
* Adds a threat intelligence overview section to alert details for alerts generated by indicator rules ({pull}155328[#155328]).
* Adds the `kibana.alert.url` field to alert documents. This field provides a shareable URL for the alert ({pull}155069[#155069]).
* Adds the ability to duplicate a shared exception list ({pull}154991[#154991]).
* Allows Timeline notes to be deleted ({pull}154834[#154834]).
* Allows you to specify conditions for when rule actions should run ({pull}154680[#154680]).
* Adds the ability to snooze rule notifications from the Rules table, the rule details page, or the Actions tab when editing a rule ({pull}153083[#153083], {pull}155407[#155407], {pull}155612[#155612]).
* Adds controls to the Alerts page that allow you to customize which filters appear at the top of the page ({pull}152450[#152450]).
* Adds a "visualizations" section to the Alert details flyout ({pull}154786[#154786]).
* Adds Analyzer to the expanded alert details flyout ({pull}153709[#153709]).
* Adds Session View to the expanded alert details flyout ({pull}154597[#154597]).

> LENS update: visualizations throughout security have been updated to Lens visualizations, and can be opened in Lens

Author: ```suggestion
```

* Fixes a bug that could cause the wrong number of rules to appear in the modal for duplicating rules ({pull}155959[#155959]).
* Fixes a bug that could cause a blank option to appear in the Create rule exception form ({pull}155221[#155221]).
* Fixes issues that affected tags in the Add rule exception component of the Shared Exception Lists page ({pull}155219[#155219]).
* Fixes a bug that displayed an outdated count of affected rules on the Shared Exception Lists page ({pull}155108[#155108]).
* Improves performance for rendering indicator match alerts on the Alerts page ({pull}154821[#154821]).
* Fixes a bug that could affect alert prevalence counts on the Alerts page ({pull}154544[#154544]).
* Adds the "Add to timeline" action to alert counts on the Detections and Response dashboard and the Entity Analytics dashboard ({pull}154299[#154299]).
* Fixes a bug that could prevent you from using breadcrumbs to navigate back to the Rules page ({pull}150322[#150322]).
* Fixes a bug that could prevent the *View all open alerts* button on the Detection and Response dashboard from applying the right filters ({pull}156893[#156893]).

> * Fixes the delete index API so it only removes {elastic-sec} 7.x signals indices (`.siem-signals-<space-id>`), index templates, and ILMs and doesn't delete 8.x alert indices (`.alerts-security.alerts-<space-id>`). 

Reviewer: @peluja1012 @marshallmain I added this for would you mind reviewing this summary? Also, let me know if we should be linking to a specific PR at the end of the summary. Thanks!

cc: @rylnd

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me! Thanks @nastasha-solomon

** <<rules-api-update,Update rule>>
** <<bulk-actions-rules-api,Bulk rule actions>>

//end::breaking-changes[]

[discrete]
[[deprecations-8.8.0]]
==== Deprecations
There are no deprecations in 8.8.0.

[discrete]
[[features-8.8.0]]
==== New features

* Adds a new response action that allows you to execute commands on a selected host ({pull}150202[#150202]).
* Adds a threat intelligence overview section to alert details for alerts generated by indicator rules ({pull}155328[#155328]).
* Adds the `kibana.alert.url` field to alert documents. This field provides a shareable URL for the alert ({pull}155069[#155069]).
* Adds the ability to duplicate a shared exception list ({pull}154991[#154991]).
* Allows Timeline notes to be deleted ({pull}154834[#154834]).
* Allows you to specify conditions for when rule actions should run ({pull}154680[#154680]).
* Adds the ability to snooze rule notifications from the Rules table, the rule details page, or the Actions tab when editing a rule ({pull}153083[#153083], {pull}155407[#155407], {pull}155612[#155612]).
* Adds controls to the Alerts page that allow you to customize which filters appear at the top of the page ({pull}152450[#152450]).

> * Adds an expandable section to the alert details flyout with various additional features and information. NOTE: to access this functionality you currently need to add a line to the `kibana.json` file. {pull}152935[#152935], {pull}152767[#152767], {pull}152303[#152303], {pull}152150[#152150], {pull}152047[#152047], {pull}150240[#150240], {pull}153807[#153807], {pull}153187[#153187], {pull}153706[#153706], {pull}153074[#153074], {pull}154196[#154196], {pull}153903[#153903], {pull}154114[#154114]).

Author: ```suggestion
```

[[release-notes-header-8.8.0]]
== 8.8

[[release-notes-8.8.0]]
=== 8.8.0

[discrete]
[[known-issue-8.8.0]]
==== Known issues

* Setting the `max_signals` value higher than the {kibana-ref}/alert-action-settings-kb.html#alert-settings[`xpack.alerting.rules.run.alerts.max`] value will lead to rule failure.

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.8.0]]
==== Breaking changes

//tag::breaking-changes[]
// NOTE: The breaking-changes tagged regions are reused in the Elastic Installation and Upgrade Guide. The pull attribute is defined within this snippet so it properly resolves in the output.
:pull: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/
* The privileges for attaching alerts to cases has changed. Now, you need at least `Read` privileges for Security and `All` privileges for Cases ({pull}147985[#147985]).

> * Rule API changes are introduced with conditional actions. In {elastic-sec} 8.7 and earlier, action frequencies were set on a rule level by defining the `throttle` field. In 8.8, action frequencies are set on an action level and the `throttle` field is replaced by the `frequency` and `alert_filters` fields. The following APIs are affected:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Rule API changes are introduced with conditional actions. In {elastic-sec} 8.7 and earlier, action frequencies were set on a rule level by defining the `throttle` field. In 8.8 and later, action frequencies are set on an action level and the `throttle` field is replaced by the `frequency` and `alert_filters` fields. The following APIs are affected:
```

** <<rules-api-get,Get rule>>
** <<rules-api-find,Find rules>>
** <<rules-api-create,Create rule>>
** <<rules-api-update,Update rule>>
** <<bulk-actions-rules-api,Bulk rule actions>>

//end::breaking-changes[]

[discrete]
[[deprecations-8.8.0]]
==== Deprecations
There are no deprecations in 8.8.0.

[discrete]
[[features-8.8.0]]
==== New features

* Adds a new response action that allows you to execute commands on a selected host (https://github.com/elastic/security-team/issues/5441[5441]).

> * Adds a threat intelligence overview section to alert details for alerts generated by indicator rules ({pull}155328[#155328]).

Reviewer 4: ya also the alert detail flyout related issues, on 49-51 below, as that's behind a feature flag

* Adds the `kibana.alert.url` field to alert events. Its value is a link to the alert details in Kibana ({pull}155069[#155069]).
* Adds an option to duplicate a shared exception list from its more actions menu ({pull}154991[#154991]).
* Adds a button that allows you to delete a note from a Timeline ({pull}154834[#154834]).
* Adds rule action filters that let you specify whether actions should only run under particular conditions ({pull}154680[#154680]).
* Adds a "snooze rule" button to the rules table ({pull}153083[#153083]).
* Adds a "snooze rule" button to the rule details and edit rule pages ({pull}155407[#155407], {pull}155612[#155612]).
* Adds controls to the Alerts page that allow you to customize which filters appear at the top of the page ({pull}152450[#152450]).

> * Adds an expandable section to the alert details flyout with various additional features and information. NOTE: to access this functionality you currently need to add a line to the `kibana.json` file. {pull}152935[#152935], {pull}152767[#152767], {pull}152303[#152303], {pull}152150[#152150], {pull}152047[#152047], {pull}150240[#150240], {pull}153807[#153807], {pull}153187[#153187], {pull}153706[#153706], {pull}153074[#153074], {pull}154196[#154196], {pull}153903[#153903], {pull}154114[#154114]).

Reviewer 2: If this does happen to go into 8.8, the note should be a separate paragraph so it can render properly. (But my $0.02 is the whole note should prob be deferred to 8.9 or 8.10 when the feature isn't behind a feature flag.)

> * Adds an expandable section to the alert details flyout with various additional features and information. NOTE: to access this functionality you currently need to add a line to the `kibana.json` file. {pull}152935[#152935], {pull}152767[#152767], {pull}152303[#152303], {pull}152150[#152150], {pull}152047[#152047], {pull}150240[#150240], {pull}153807[#153807], {pull}153187[#153187], {pull}153706[#153706], {pull}153074[#153074], {pull}154196[#154196], {pull}153903[#153903], {pull}154114[#154114]).

Author: Cool I agree, best to wait until the feature flag is removed.

* Adds a "visualizations" section to the Alert details flyout ({pull}154786[#154786]).
* Adds Analyzer to the expanded alert details flyout ({pull}153709[#153709]).
* Adds Session View to the expanded alert details flyout ({pull}154597[#154597]).

> LENS update: visualizations throughout security have been updated to Lens visualizations, and can be opened in Lens

Reviewer 2: Agree; this line also has some formatting inconsistencies, but those are moot because the feature is already covered below (currently line 73).

[discrete]
[[enhancements-8.8.0]]
==== Enhancements

* Updates the Notable anomalies table, and renames it to Anomalies ({pull}155687[#155687]).
* Updates the Data Quality dashboard to include a new tree map, and storage size metrics for each index ({pull}155581[#155581]).
* Displays additional anomaly jobs on the Entity Analytics dashboard ({pull}155520[#155520]).
* Adds cloud infrastructure-related fields to the alert details flyout's highlighted fields ({pull}155247[#155247]).
* Allows you to specify how to handle alert suppression for alerts with missing fields ({pull}155055[#155055]).

> * Updates the rule settings Actions interface ({pull}154526[#154526]).

Reviewer: @e40pud should this be release-noted as a new feature? An enhancement is typically smaller in scale.

```suggestion
* Gives users more control over how they receive alert notifications and lets them define conditions that must be met for an notification to occur ({pull}154526[#154526]).
```

> * Adds a warning message to tell you when the maximum number of alerts for a single rule execution is exceeded ({pull}154112[#154112]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds a warning message to tell you when a rule has reached the maximum number of alerts limit ({pull}154112[#154112]).
```

* Updates how browser field descriptions are provided to {kib} ({pull}153498[#153498]).

> * Makes alert links on the Entity Analytics page navigate to the Alerts page instead of opening in Timeline ({pull}153372[#153372]).

Reviewer: Grouping this with the other Entity Analytics dashboard enhancements.
```suggestion
```

* Enables multi-level grouping for alerts on the Alerts page, based on various fields ({pull}152862[#152862]).

> * Makes it possible to link directly to a version of the Alerts page with filters active, and makes widgets on the Detection and Response dashboard do so ({pull}152714[#152714]).

Reviewer: @michaelolo24 would you mind reviewing this? I'm not sure what this enhancement is so idk how to simplify this summary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Adds links to the Detection & Response and Entity Analytics dashboards that jump to the Alerts page with filters enabled ({pull}152714[#152714]).
```

* Updates the visualizations throughout {elastic-sec} to Lens visualizations ({pull}150531[#150531]).

> * Adds a "Share alert" button to the alert details flyout, and makes alert flyout URLs more sharable ({pull}148800[#148800]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds a *Share alert* link to the alert details flyout ({pull}148800[#148800]).
```

> * Adds a note to the Rules page when a maintenance window is running ({pull}155386[#155386]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds a warning message to the Rules page when a maintenance window is running ({pull}155386[#155386]).
```

* Adds a global search bar to the Detections and Response and Entity Analytics dashboards ({pull}156832[#156832]).

[discrete]
[[bug-fixes-8.8.0]]
==== Bug fixes

* Fixes a bug that interfered with the default time range when you opened an alert in Timeline ({pull}156884[#156884]).

> * Updates where the technical preview tags appear for host risk score features ({pull}156659[#156659], {pull}156514[#156514]).

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem like a bug fix; maybe an enhancement? @jmikell821 are the risk scores still tech preview or are they GA this release?

> * Fixes a bug that could cause the alerts page to become unresponsive after you entered an invalid query ({pull}156542[#156542]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could cause the Alerts page to become unresponsive after you entered an invalid query ({pull}156542[#156542]).
```

> * Updates the colors used for entity analytics graphs to match the colors used for alerts graphs ({pull}156383[#156383]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Updates the colors used for entity analytic graphs to match the colors used for alert graphs ({pull}156383[#156383]).
```

* Fixes a bug that caused errors on the Data Quality dashboard when a `basePath` was configured ({pull}156233[#156233]).

> * Fixes a bug that could cause problems when different users edited a single timeline simultaneously ({pull}155663[#155663]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could cause problems when different users simultaneously edited a Timeline ({pull}155663[#155663]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that could cause the wrong number of rules to appear in the interface for duplicating rules ({pull}155959[#155959]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could cause the wrong number of rules to appear in the modal for duplicating rules ({pull}155959[#155959]).
```

> * Fixes a bug that could cause a blank option to appear in the Create rule exception interface ({pull}155221[#155221]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fixes a bug that could cause a blank option to appear in the Create rule exception form ({pull}155221[#155221]).
```

* Fixes issues that affected tags in the Add rule exception component of the Shared Exception Lists page ({pull}155219[#155219]).
* Fixes a bug that displayed an outdated count of affected rules on the Shared Exception Lists page ({pull}155108[#155108]).
* Improves performance for rendering indicator match alerts on the Alerts page ({pull}154821[#154821]).
* Fixes a bug that could affect alert prevalence counts on the Alerts page ({pull}154544[#154544]).

> * Adds the "Add to timeline" action to alert counts on the Detections and Response dashboard and the Entity Analytics dashboard ({pull}154299[#154299]).

Reviewer: @stephmilovic this seems more like an enhancement than a fixed bug because the change happened because the alert count redirect link was updated to the Alerts page. Should we move this summary to the enhancement section?

```suggestion
* Adds the *Add to timeline* inline action to alert counts on the Detections and Response dashboard and the Entity Analytics dashboard ({pull}154299[#154299]).
```

Reviewer 2: Also I think the option is now "Investigate in timeline" (jump to Timeline UI and populate query there), not "Add to timeline" (add field to Timeline, but don't jump there).

[[known-issue-8.8.0]]
==== Known issues

* Setting the `max_signals` value higher than the {kibana-ref}/alert-action-settings-kb.html#alert-settings[`xpack.alerting.rules.run.alerts.max`] value will lead to rule failure.

[discrete]
[[breaking-changes-8.8.0]]
==== Breaking changes

//tag::breaking-changes[]
// NOTE: The breaking-changes tagged regions are reused in the Elastic Installation and Upgrade Guide. The pull attribute is defined within this snippet so it properly resolves in the output.
:pull: https://github.com/elastic/kibana/pull/
* The privileges for attaching alerts to cases have changed. Now, you need at least `Read` privileges for Security and `All` privileges for Cases ({pull}147985[#147985]).
* Adds conditional actions to the rules API. In {elastic-sec} 8.7 and earlier, action frequencies were set on a rule level by defining the `throttle` field. In 8.8 and later, action frequencies are set at the action level, and the `throttle` field is replaced by the `frequency` and `alert_filters` fields. The following APIs are affected:
** <<rules-api-get,Get rule>>
** <<rules-api-find,Find rules>>
** <<rules-api-create,Create rule>>
** <<rules-api-update,Update rule>>

> ** <<bulk-actions-rules-api,Bulk rule actions>>

Reviewer 5: Sorry I'm late with this comment, but I couldn't find any docs on what schema the `frequency` and `alert_filters` fields have. I think this section should be updated: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/current/rules-api-create.html#actions-object-schema

Reviewer: Hey, @banderror - no worries. I'm actually adding those docs in this PR: https://github.com/elastic/security-docs/pull/3320

Once I merge the PR, I can update these doc links to point to the `frequency` and `alert_filters` docs. Or, we can just keep them as is and point to the main page, for example:
- [Get rule](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/rules-api-get.html)
- [Find rule](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/rules-api-find.html)
- [Create rule](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/rules-api-create.html)
- [Update rule](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/rules-api-update.html)
- [Bulk rule actions](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/bulk-actions-rules-api.html)

cc: @benironside @jmikell821

Reviewer: Hey, @banderror. We've updated these links as per your request [here](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/security/8.8/release-notes-header-8.8.0.html#breaking-changes-8.8.0). Thanks again for checking on this!

Reviewer 5: Thanks, @nastasha-solomon!
